It appears that Israel is
setting the stage
for a long feared ground
offensive into Rafah.
The Israeli military
dropped leaflets urging people
in parts of eastern Rafah
to evacuate immediately.
The IDF calls it
a limited scope operation.
The defense minister
earlier told troops
to expect intense action and Rafah.
Now many Palestinians are already fleeing
the area.
The southern Gaza city was supposed to be
a safe place
where more than a million
Palestinians have taken refuge there
after fleeing from other areas.
The UN says the area
where people have been directed to go
is simply not suitable to live.
CNN's Arlette
Signs is at the white House.
But let's begin with Nic
Robertson, who's
following all the developments
from London now.
Nic,
this RAF operation was long anticipated.
What are you hearing about
what Israel is planning to say?
And if this indeed
is the ground offensive
that Israel has been warning about.
It has all the hallmarks
of a ground offensive.
And typically
when Israel has launched
previous ground offensives
going into Gaza not long after the
those horrific October 7th attacks.
it took many days before we began
to get an idea of the scope
and scale of the operation.
It was a big operation,
but Israel was sort of able to keep it
pretty much under wraps.
Remembering
journalists like ourselves
and other news organizations
are not allowed
by Israel
to go into Gaza
to freely report
and see what's happening.
So there's a level of difficulty
to to understand
precisely what's happening
in and around Rafah at the moment.
But what is clear,
these leaflets that the IDF are dropping
are very similar to leaflets
they've dropped at the heads
prior to other major military operations.
They've told, Palestinians
and about 12 different,
blocks of housing.
That's about 100,000 people.
The UN estimates to leave their houses
and go to an expanded, safer area.
And these leaflets, these fliers
that the IDF are dropping,
tell, tell the residents
there that their area is going to be used
as, is going to be
where an offensive is against terrorists.
And it says that those terrorists
are going to hide among you.
It's very clear
that when the IDF goes in that
the scenarios could be it appears like,
the previous military operations
where civilians
get caught up in the operations.
Now, has the operation
military operation actually begun?
It doesn't appear so, but again,
we're we're restricted in what we can see
and what we can actually
get access to report.
So, we know that
the negotiations at the moment
are sort of stalled.
They're not completely broken down.
So is this a last ditch pressure effort
by, Israel on Hamas
to, to cede to their terms?
The gap still remains
very big at those talks.
So what the UN is describing now and in
and around the area of Rafah,
where people are being
told to go to these areas
where there isn't enough food, isn't
enough water,
isn't enough sanitation,
not the right conditions
for them to go live.
And as we've seen in other operations,
it won't necessarily be safe in these
designated humanitarian safer areas.
So the U.N.
is very concerned
not just about their welfare, physical
but psychological welfare,
and that this could precipitate panic,
which could mean and in an area
where there are about 1.5 million
people living,
that could be a pretty dire consequences.
And Unicef,
Unicef is saying about 600,000 children
there, face a very uncertain time
at this moment.
Nic Robertson, thank you.
Let's head over to the white House now.
And Arlette signs.
What's the view from there
and what the Biden administration
is saying about all this,
considering cease fire talks are ongoing
where the CIA director,
Bill Burns, is in Doha right now
trying to broker a deal.
Netanyahu has said over and over again
that deal or no deal.
this ground incursion will go forward.
Yeah.
Amara, there's no question
that the white House is watching
these latest moves from Israel
relating to eastern Rafah
incredibly closely.
It comes as the administration
for months
now has warned about
a potential ground operation
in Rafah,
with President Biden
and others here at the white House
stressing to Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu that they need to ensure
there is a plan in place
to ensure the safety
and evacuation of the more than 1.4
million Palestinian Guineans
who are in the Rafah area.
at this time.
Now, on Friday,
we have reported that U.S.
and Israeli
officials had been in conversations
about Rafah, that Israel provided insight
into their thinking
relating to the evacuation of Rafah.
But sources cautions
that what was presented
did not appear to be a final plan,
that there was no full briefing
when it comes to
what a military operation
would look like.
The white House
certainly has been watching this
with quite
a bit of concern,
as President Biden's also facing
domestic pressure here at home,
relating to the way that Israel
has conducted its campaign in Gaza.
Now, over the weekend, we also learned
that the U.S. paused a shipment of U.S.
made ammunition
to Israel,
a source familiar with the matter told us
that this was not due
to this potential operation into Rafah,
and that this would not impact
aid going forward to big questions
about why exactly
there was that pause in shipment.
Senator Chris Coons,
a key
member of the Foreign Relations
Committee, suggested
there could have been logistical issues.
But this is all playing out.
As Nick noted, against the backdrop
of those
hostage
and ceasefire negotiations
that appear to have stalled out
over the weekend.
CIA director
Bill Burns was on hand in Cairo,
working as a mediator on this issue.
He then traveled on to Doha,
where he met
with a guitar Prime minister.
He was set to travel to Israel today,
but is actually remaining in Doha,
as the administration
all last week had really been
speaking in quite optimistic tones
about the prospect of
a deal coming together.
But we saw the Israeli and Hamas sides
both really blame each other
for what they viewed
as each other's extreme views.
So this is something that the white House
certainly wants
to try to get an agreement on.
But at the time it appears
that those conversations
are stalled out
doesn't mean that
they won't get on track at some point.
but also, I would note that today
President Biden here
at the white House
will be having lunch
with Jordan's King Abdullah.
Abdullah, of course, is a key,
player in the region.
He has warned
and expressed concerns
about the way
that this operation
has been conducted in Gaza,
about the humanitarian issues
that are on hand there.
So the president might have a chance
to hear
directly from King Abdullah
about his concerns.
But all of this comes
as you have big questions
about what
Israel will be doing going forward
when it relates to Rafah, as the U.S.
has been trying to stress
that they need to take great care
to ensure the safety of civilians there.
Yeah.
so much uncertainty
when it comes to the fate
of the civilians.
Arlette signs at the white House.
Thank you very much.
Now, earlier,
our Max foster
spoke to Scott Anderson,
the director of Unwra affairs in Gaza.
Unwra is a UN agency
that works to support
Palestinian refugees.
he is currently in Gaza,
and he says people need a
place to escape the fighting
are concerned.
Some 1.4
million people
that have sought refuge
from the violence in Rafah,
people need to be given an opportunity
to move away from conflict.
if they aren't, I mean,
the results will be catastrophic.
The impact will be catastrophic.
to have a fire in such a densely
populated neighborhoods
that that exists throughout Rafah,
where I sit and tell us all time,
which is one of the neighborhoods
for to the West,
it's incredibly densely populated.
You see tents and makeshift
plastic structures
everywhere,
as if an operation
happened here at any scale.
it's
hard to predict the scale of deaths
other than to say
it would be catastrophic
and the impacts
would be catastrophic
for people who sought safety here.
The Americans have
obviously warned against
civilian casualties.
they've given that warning to Israel.
how much support
you're getting from countries
other than Israel in your work
to making making
sure civilians are looked after?
I think this is
certainly a concern for everybody,
I think, including Israel.
But innocent civilians
are not harmed in this conflict.
we've heard very loudly
from the United States, as you mentioned,
but also many countries
within the European Union
as well as the Gulf states.
So anybody that's a donor here
or is active
here has the same concern
as the United Nations.
And that is we want
innocent civilians to be kept safe.
We want children to be kept safe.
And we continue to call on all parties
to the conflict,
to ensure that civilians are safe
and not impacted by ongoing hostilities.